---
layout: base
title: Groups of Small Orders &#124; Groups
---

# Groups of Small Orders
{: .page-title}

We have developed lots of theories about groups.
We can see them in practice in the study of groups of small orders.

## Useful Lemmas

> *Lemma.*{: .lem}
> Let $G$ be a finite group in which every element except the identity has order $2$.
> Then $G$ is abelian, and has order $2^m$ for some integer $m$.
>
> *Proof.*{: .prf}
>
> For any $g, h \in G$, $gh \in G$ is also of order $2$, therefore $gh = (gh)^{-1} = h^{-1}g^{-1} = hg$ and $G$ is abelian.
>
> Let $H = \set{g_1, g_2, ..., g_m}$ be the minimal generating set for $G$, which means $H$ generates $G$ and no proper subset of $H$ can do so.
> Hence, every $g \in G$ is a power of elements in $H$, as $G$ is abelian, we have
>
> $$
  g = g_1^{p_1}g_2^{p_2}...{g_m}^{p_m}
  $$
>
> Suppose $g = g_1^{p_1}g_2^{p_2}...{g_m}^{p_m} = g_1^{q_1}g_2^{q_2}...{g_m}^{q_m}$ where $p_i$ and $q_i$ can only be $0$ or $1$.
> If $p_i \not = q_i$, we have $g_i = g_1^{r_1}g_2^{r_2}...g_{i-1}^{r_{i-1}}g_{i+1}^{r_{i+1}}...g_m^{r_m}$ which contradicts with the fact that $H$ is the minimal generating set.
> So the expression is unique and every combination of $p_1, p_2, ..., p_m$ is a distinct element in $G$.

> *Lemma.*{: .lem}
> Let $G$ be a group of even order. Then $G$ contains an element of order $2$.
>
> *Proof.*{: .prf}
>
> Suppose $G$ has $2n$ elements.
> By pairing every element in $G$ with its inverse, we will have at least 2 sets having only one element, one of which is $\set{e}$.
> The element in another set will have order $2$.

## Groups of order 3

> *Theorem.*{: .thm}
> Every group of order $3$ is cyclic.
>
> *Proof.*{: .prf}
>
> Every group of prime order is cyclic. But we will analyze it from first principles.
>
> Let $G = \set{e, x, y}$ be a group of order $3$.
> We have $yx \not = x$ and $yx \not = y$ so $yx = e$.
> By Langrange's Corollary, $x^3 = e$, so $y = yx^3 = x^2$.
> Hence, $G = \set{e, x, x^2}$ is a cyclic group.

## Groups of order 4

> *Theorem.*{: .thm}
> Every group of order $6$ is either cyclic or dihedral.
>
> *Proof.*{: .prf}
>
> By Lagrange, the order of every element is either $1, 2$ or $4$.
> If there is an element of order $4$, then $G \cong C_4$.
>
> If there is no element of order $4$, all elements other than the identity have order $2$.
> Therefore, $G$ is abelian. Picking any two elements we have $x^2 = y^2 = e$ and $xy = yx = y^{-1}x$.
> So, $G \cong D_4 \cong V_4$.

## Groups of order 6

> *Theorem.*{: .thm}
> Every group of order $6$ is either cyclic or dihedral.
>
> *Proof.*{: .prf}
>
> By Lagrange, the order of every element is either $1, 2, 3$ or $6$.
> If there is an element of order $6$, then $G \cong C_6$.
>
> If there is no element of order $6$, elements other than the identity can only have orders $2$ or $3$.
> There must be an element $y$ of order $3$, otherwise every element is of order $2$ and the order of group has to be powers of $2$.
> $\langle y \rangle$ is a normal subgroup as it has index $2$.
> Also, there must be an element $x$ of order $2$ as the order of $G$ is even.
> Therefore, we have $xyx^{-1} \in \langle y \rangle$ and
>
> + $xyx^{-1} = e$, $y = e$ which is not possible, or
>
> + $xyx^{-1} = y$, $xy = yx$ so $(xy)^m$ = $x^my^m$ and $xy$ is of order $6$ (can't be $2$ or $3$) and $G \cong C_6$, or
>
> + $xyx^{-1} = y^2 = y^{-1}$, so $xy = y^{-1}x$, together with $x^2 = y^3 = e$, $G \cong D_6$.

## Groups of order 8
{: #groups-of-order-8}

> *Theorem.*{: .thm}
> Groups of order 8 is either
>
> + abelian and isomorphic to one of $C\_8$, $C\_4 \times C\_2$, $C\_2 \times C\_2 \times C\_2$, or
>
> + not abelian and isomorphic to one of $D\_8$ or $Q\_8$.
>
> *Proof.*{: .prf}
>
> By Lagrange, the order of every elements is either $1, 2, 4$ or $8$.
> If there is an element of order $8$, then $G \cong C_8$.
>
> Suppose that the largest order of an element of $G$ is $4$.
> Choose an element $x$ whose order is $4$ and an element $y$ from $G \setminus \langle x \rangle$.
> As $\langle x \rangle$ is of index $2$, the cosets $\langle x \rangle \cup \langle x \rangle y = G$.
> Thus, the elements of $G$ are
>
> $$
  G = \Set{e, x, x^2, x^3, y, xy, x^2y, x^3y}
  $$
>
> Consider the element $yx$.
> $yx \not \in \langle x \rangle$ otherwise $y \in \langle x \rangle$.
> $yx \not = y$ otherwise $x = e$.
> $yx \not = x^2y$ otherwise $x = y^{-1}x^2y \implies x^2 = y^{-1}x^4y = e$.
> Therefore, $yx = xy$ or $yx = x^3y = x^{-1}y$.
>
> Consider the element $y^2$.
> $y^2 = yy \not \in \langle x \rangle y$ otherwise $y \in \langle x \rangle$.
> $y^2 \not= x, x^3$ othwerwise $y$ has order $8$.
> Therefore, $y^2 = e$ or $y^2 = x^2$.
>
> Hence, we have in total four possibilities:
>
> + $yx = xy$ and $y^2 = e$, the group is abelian, generated by $\Set{x, y}$ and isomorphic to $C\_4 \times C\_2$.
>
> + $yx = xy$ and $y^2 = x^2$, the group is abelian, generated by $\Set{x, yx^{-1}}$ as $(yx^{-1})^2 = y^2x^{-2} = e$ and isomorphic to $C\_4 \times C\_2$.
>
> + $yx = x^3y$ and $y^2 = e$, the group satisfies $x^4 = y^2 = e$ and $yx = x^{-1}y$ and is isomorphic to $D\_8$.
>
> + $yx = x^3y$ and $y^2 = x^2$, the group satisfies $x^4 = e$, $y^2 = x^2$ and $yx = x^{-1}y$ and is isomorphic to $Q\_8$.
>
> Finally, if every element except the identity is of order $2$, then $G$ is abelian.
> Choose $x, y, z$ from $G \setminus \Set{e}$ such that $xy \not= z$.
> We have $H = \Set{e, x, y, xy} \cong C\_2 \times C\_2$ and if $K = \Set{e, z}$, $HK = G$ and $H \cap K = \Set{e}$.
> By Direct Product Theorem, the group is isomorphic to $C\_2 \times C\_2 \times C\_2$.

## Groups of order p

> *Theorem.*{: .thm}
> Suppose $G$ is a finite group of order $p$, where $p$ is prime.
> Then $G$ is cyclic and the only subgroups are $\set{e}$ and $G$.
>
> *Proof.*{: .prf}
>
> For any $a \in G$, by Lagrange, $\text{ord}(a) = p$ and generates $G$, so $G$ is cyclic.
>
> For $H \le G$, by Lagrange, $\|H\|$ divides $\|G\| = p$, hence $\|H\| = 1$ or $p$.
> When $\|H\| = 1$, $H = \set{e}$. When $\|H\| = p$, $H = G$. .

## Groups of order 2p

> *Theorem.*{: .thm}
> Every group of order $2p$, where $p$ is prime, is either cyclic or dihedral.
>
> *Proof.*{: .prf}
>
> When $p = 2$, the group is of order $4$ and as shown above it is either cyclic or dihedral.
>
> Assume $p > 2$, by Lagrange, the order of every element is either $1, 2, p$ or $2p$.
> If there is an element of order $2p$, then $G \cong C_{2p}$.
>
> If there is no element of order $2p$, elements other than identity can only have orders $2$ or $p$.
> There must be an element $y$ of order $p$, otherwise every element is of order $2$ and the order of group has to be powers of $2$.
> $\langle y \rangle$ is a normal subgroup as it has index $2$.
> Also, there must be an element $x$ of order $2$ as the order of $G$ is even.
> Therefore, we have $xyx^{-1} \in \langle y \rangle$ so $xyx^{-1} = y^k$ for $0 \le k \le p - 1$.
> Furthermore, $y = xy^kx = (xyx)^k = y^{k^2}$ so $k^2 = 1$.
>
> + $xyx^{-1} = e$, $y = e$ which is not possible, or
>
> + $xyx^{-1} = y$, $xy = yx$ so $(xy)^m$ = $x^my^m$ and $xy$ is of order $6$ (can't be $2$ or $3$) and $G \cong C_6$, or
>
> + $xyx^{-1} = y^2 = y^{-1}$, so $xy = y^{-1}x$, together with $x^2 = y^3 = e$, $G \cong D_6$.

## References

* Alan F. Beardon _Algebra and Geometry_, 2005 - Chapter 12.1, 12.9
